Welcome back everyone to this lecture on rolling and expanding.
We can use pandas built in rolling methods to create things like a rolling mean based off a given time
period.
Let's quickly discuss what a rolling method can be used for often daily financial data can be a bit
noisy.
Well we can do is use the rolling mean which is often called a moving average to get more signal about
the general trends.
The data you'll provide a window of a set time period and then use that to calculate whatever your aggregate
statistic is such as the mean or average.
Let's see what this actually looks like with pandas in her Jupiter notebook.
All right.
Here I am at my Jupiter notebook I've imported both pandas and Matt plotless.
We will be applauding in this lectures we can visually see that rolling and expanding method and then
have also imported the Wal-Mart stock data that we've been working with with the index column being
that they have all said states to be true.
Let's just take a quick look or data one more time.
We have an open high low close volume just that close.
And then some sort of date time index.
So let's go ahead and plot this.
I'll say DMF open I will plot this and figure syas have it be 16 by six that should give us a nice little
plot and here I can see the actual daily data all the way from early 2012 to late 2016.
So there's quite a bit of noise because this is daily data would be nice.
I can average this out by the week so we can actually do a moving average or what's known as a rolling
mean as well using panderers.
So the way you do this is either on a particular column or series or on the entire data frame you call
the rolling method.
So you will say if rolling shift tab here and you'll see the actual arguments seek capacity will focus
mainly on the window argument or the window.
We'd take a look at this.
That is the size of the moving window and this is the number of observations used for calculating the
statistic.
So this case we're going to do is say seven because I want every previous seven days to be calculated
with.
And then we actually add in the aggregate statistic as if we're doing something like a group by in this
case we'll do mean and then let's just get the head of 20.
So that's going to be returning the first 20 rows.
So we don't need that many probably say 14.
OK so Notice what happens here.
The very first six values those have all become blank.
And if we look at the value for 2012 111 that's become fifty nine point four nine.
And the next value is almost the exact same it's really similar.
Now what's actually going on here is this first data point that we get with an actual value.
Fifty nine point four nine that is the average or mean of these first seven rows.
Now the reason the first six rows are blank is because there wasn't enough data to actually fill that
in.
We specified We want a window of seven.
So this first six rows all had less than 7 points to aggregate with.
So that's where they all get filled in.
No.
So what are the major effects of calculating a moving average or using this rolling method.
Is that our data becomes a lot less noisy and becomes more reflective of the trend than the actual data.
I can see here that this point fifty nine point nine is very similar to fifty nine point four six which
is again really similar to the nine point three too.
You don't get such noisy jumps on the daily data because you're averaging the previous seven days.
Let's actually plot this out so you can see this visually.
Well say with open.
So that's our original data frame.
This rolling doesn't actually take place on the original data frame.
So just to show you that real quick if I call my data frame notice still has all the original information
there.
So this is not in place.
Operation.
So coming back here I'm going to call my original open column that I'm going to plot it out.
Then on top of that we'll say if rolling and let's actually just to really show the effect here will
make the window be 7s on the same window.
Is 7.
And then we'll keep expanding that to more and more days.
So that's the average and then off of that data frame data from I just showed above.
I will call the close call them and then plot that out as well.
So let's run that and see what we get.
So this isn't a good figure size to actually show what's going on so let's adjust the figure size let's
say for your size is equal to 16:6.
All right if we take a look at this plot we end up seeing is that blue line that is the original open
price data.
And then we also see the rolling close that seven day average.
And notice that the orange line that rolling day seven they close that ends up having not as much noise
as the blue line.
You can see that certain big jumps are set in big drops that happen on the span of just one day or a
few days don't get reflected in that orange line.
Now to really see this effect especially for such a long time series we're going over the span of several
years.
So a weekly rolling average isn't a whole lot.
Let's actually make this 30 days and then we can see the 30 day moving average on our dataset.
Now something to keep in mind once you run this is that those first 29 days aren't going to have that
orange line because there wasn't enough data to actually calculate that rolling mean.
And now you can definitely see how it's pretty much just the main trend of the actual stock data.
So it's kind of like to kind of detect where the stock price may go based off the previous 30 days of
values.
So you can see here there's definitely a trend to go down here based off the 30 days of values you can
see kind of plateaus.
And there's a lot less noise here and you can keep expanding this obviously the larger you expand this
window the more you focus on just the general trend over a longer period of time versus actually focusing
on those actually daily movements.
So if I run this again then I can see the 3 month or 90 day trend goes up kind of flattens out a bit.
Then there's a big drop and then it starts coming back up again.
Okay.
So there's lots of ways to actually add in a legend to this to show you one of the easier ways.
So the easiest way to add a legend is just make that rolling value add new column and then panderers
will automatically add in the legend.
So how to do that.
Or essentially just going to say the close price.
Well it's actually a close 30 day.
So moving average.
And I know it's at that equal to close.
And I can call rolling not just off the entire data frame but also the series or column itself.
And then I'll call window 30 mean.
And then once we've done that I can actually just pass on a list of those column names so I'll say close
30 day May and let's make sure there's actually a list of column names because when I passed one more
in next I'm going to pass and is just the normal close.
And then I can plot that out.
Well let's give this nice big size let's say big size.
What we've been working of 16 by six so now running that even though the colors have switched.
I can actually see the labels themselves so closely they close and you can use all your matte plotless
skills to change just color the style this to whatever you prefer.
Just keep in mind that when you actually call off a single data frame multiple columns paint those will
automatically make that nice little legend for you.
OK.
So now what do you do if you want to take into account everything from the start the time series to
the actual rolling point of the value.
So for instance not just take into account a period of seven days or 30 days but instead take in to
account everything since the beginning of the time series to where you are in that current point.
Well the way you can do this is with the expanding method.
So let me show you how you can use that in order to do this.
Quite simple.
We'll just say DMF the clothes column and then instead of calling rolling I will call expanding
in the expanding method it has this argument of minimum periods.
That is the actual minimum number of periods you need.
You can just leave it as one that basically means it just needs one period to start calculating the
expanding mean and then we're going to plot this out let's call Fix size of what we did before 16 by
6 so if we run this now we get this result.
So what does this plot actually represent.
Well basically each particular time stamp on the x axis what is shown on the y axis is the actual value
of everything that came before it averaged out.
So that's why you get this big long trend line instead of something like this where it actually focused
on the actual movements.
Basically this very last point that is the average of all the values that came before it and the halfway
point is the average of all that.
That first half that came before it etc..
So that's just expanding it essentially takes into account everything since the beginning of the time
series to the current point on the x axis.
And this just shows kind of major trends.
But depending on the length the time series it may or may not be that helpful.
So this kind of indicates that since the very beginning or average price has risen but it won't reflect
something like a drop in the price during the middle of a time series so we can see here that on average
in the very beginning we had $60 and then at the very end of that time series comes out around 70.
So this is sort of reflected here.
But again don't take that as kind of a one to one comparison because there could be kind of a huge rise
in the middle and a huge drop and that would end up eating out.
So keep that in mind.
It may not reflect the beginning versus the end there's just a general expanding mean from the beginning
of the time series wherever you are at that point.
So I just wanted to be aware that you can use that will be using rolling a lot more often than expanding.
Now before we end this lecture in future section of the course we're going to be talking a lot more
about financial analysis plots and technical indicators.
But since we're actually talking about rolling means and moving averages right now it's a really good
idea to introduce one financial analysis or technical indicator that's really common to use and it's
called the Bolinger band and you may have even seen it yourself before.
So let's hop over to some slides explain what the Buller's your bands are and then we'll hop back to
this Jupiter notebook and code them out ourselves.
All right so let's take a brief moment to discuss Bollinger bands.
This is what a Bollinger Band actually looks like and they're Bolinger bands were developed by John
Bolinger.
Essentially what they are they're volatility bands placed above and below a moving average where the
volatility is based on the standard deviation which changes as volatility increases or decreases and
the bands will automatically widen when volatility increases and narrow and volatility decreases and
the dynamic nature of the bowl and your bands also means that they can be used on different securities
with the standard setting so you can use them on a variety of securities or stocks.
So for signals Bollinger bands can be used to identify tops and bottoms or to the term and the strength
of the actual trend.
Let's take a look at this plot a little more closely.
That blue line that middle blue line that is the original closing price and then the orange line is
the 20 day means so typically Bollinger bands use a 20 day period as their movie average.
But other analysis techniques can increase those actual moving average windows.
And then we see the actual bands themselves so the top green line that is the upper bands and the lower
red line that is the lower band.
So those are the Bolger bands themselves.
The two middle lines those are just what we did before the moving average with the Borgir bands actually
are is that Greenline and the red.
So we can see that as the stock becomes more volatile.
Those bands actually expand.
So for example we can see in 2016 that fifth month or maybe in 2016.
June there was kind of a drop and then a big spike or jump.
So that would mean that your standard deviation is jumping or moving really drastically with such a
large jump in the closing price.
The trend that will close 20 they mean reflects that a little bit of a tiny drop but the actual jump
in price is much better reflected with those Bollinger bands based off the standard deviation instead
of the mean.
So you can see that there is kind of a jump in there expansion indicating that theres a lot more volatility
for that time period and based off your quantitative trading algorithm you may want to trade more when
it's more volatile or you may want to close that position if it's too volatile for you.
So basically what people can use these bands for is to determine whether a price movement is significant
or not.
So technically prices are relatively high when they're actually above the upper band.
So you can see there's a few points such as in right before February of 2016.
We see the blue spike a little bit above that upper band and we can definitely see it in May 2016 that
is spikes below the lower band.
So again this is not just a kind of straight indicator of whether you should buy or sell.
So a relatively high price should not be regarded as bearish or as a cell signal and the relatively
low price should not be considered bullish or as a signal.
You know prices are higher low for a particular reason.
So as other indicators Bollinger Bands are not meant to be used as a standalone tool to do your trade
off.
There's just one other technical analysis or one other indicator that you can use and factor into your
decisions.
So let's hop over to the Jupiter notebook and actually code some of this out.
All right so let's actually go through the process of creating the Bolinger pants and it's really actually
quite simple with pandas.
So the first thing I'm going to comment on are actual steps we need to create three columns and then
put in our close call them along with it.
So the first column I want to make is the closing price 20 day moving average then I'm going to create
the upper band and the upper band that's going to be equal to that 20 day moving average plus two times
the standard deviation over 20 days.
So it's going to be basically rolling dot SDD and then the lower band is going to be equal to that 20
day moving average minus two time whoops minus two times the standard deviation.
Over the past 20 days.
And then finally we'll have the close column which we already have.
OK so let's create this closing day 20 day moving average source HCF close
20 they mean.
And as I mentioned before Ballinger bands can be used on a variety of window sizes so there's not to
be 20 it can be 30 can be seven different algorithms or different people use different band sizes or
window sizes.
And we're going to basis off the original close call them and then call rerolling give this a window
of 20 days and then call mean that mean to get the average off of it.
Then for the upper band I'll create a column called Upper and then I'll set that equal to the close
20 day mean that I just created and I'm going to add two times the close column and hearing to say rolling
the window 20.
But instead of calling me I'm going to call SDD for the standard deviation.
So essentially here I'm just grabbing and get me the standard deviation of a rolling window of 20 previously
asked for the average and I'm just asking for a standard deviation.
Multiply it by two.
And then add that indicating the volatility as the upper bands of 20 day moving average and then I'm
going to copy and paste this for the lower in all you do here is instead of saying upper call this slower
and instead of saying Plus I'm subtracting.
So this is basically kind of her indicator of volatility the standard deviation over the past 20 days
multiplied by two and will add and subtract that as our upper and lower bands once we've done that.
We're actually ready to plot them all.
So we'll say give me the close give me the close 20 they mean and then give me the upper bands and the
lower bands.
And make sure I have a comma there.
And I'm going to plot this out and it's given a nice size.
Will say size is equal to 16:6 And if we scroll down here we have kind of a really long time series
data set.
So it may not be super clear but hopefully you can see that I have these two bands that green tends
to usually be above the blue just like why is the red tenso usually be below the blue.
And then the orange is that actual moving trend line there.
So we would kind of assume that if there's blue movement above the green line or below the red line
something's happening here where we should take a closer look.
And if you want to just kind of zone in on a particular part of this dataset you could just use indexing
or for instance if you just want to focus on the end you could use something like just say tail of the
last 200 days and just plot that.
And this way the lights kind of indicate what we saw in the slides earlier.
All right.
So we'll be seeing a lot more financial analysis plots and technical indicators in the future.
But since this one's so closely related to using rolling I wanted to mention it here in this lecture.
OK.
I hope you enjoyed learning how to use those with time series data.
Coming up next is kind of a little capstone project to aggregate everything that we've learned in the
first half of the Course and talk a little bit more about financial analysis.
Thanks everyone and I'll see you at the next section of the course.